4.     Page 4, line 33.  “time complexity” .  should this be “time and complexity”?

In fact "time complexity" was intended (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_complexity)


7.  Page 9.  Line 9.  “Every descriptor implements an interface…” The
descriptors do not actually implement anything.  What are the authors
saying here?

Updated to note that descriptor *classes* implement the interface

8.     Page 11.  ~line 17.  “the fact many descriptors are correlated
with others suggests that it does not matter too much which set of
descriptors are used in an application”.  I disagree and have trouble
thinking of any application where this would generally be true.   For
instance, using the authors own categorization – I would be shocked if
similar results (say for clustering or similarity) would be achieved
using atom-pair fingerprints versus nearly any set of QM descriptors.
I would hope the authors are attempting to say something like “there
are many instances of overlap between descriptors types (for example:
MOE VSA and Jurs/Stanton CPSA) and choosing amongst related descriptor
types may not have a substantial impact on certain
results/applications.” 

While it is true that there are ovleraps between descriptor types, and
that choosing one type ofdescriptor over another, assuming they are
related, will not really change a model, the exact same thing can be
said of numerically correlated descriptors. We did not mention
anywhere that swapping atom-pair fingerprints with QM descriptors is a
valid procedure.

However if descriptor X and descriptor Y are numerically correlated
(as measured by a high Pearsons correlation value), then a predictive
model where X is replaced with Y will not show any significant
changes. This is true even if X & Y characterize differenct aspects of
the molecule (but indicates that these 'different' aspects are
actually related at a more fndamental level).

However, the text has been updated to make this point more explicitly.

9.  Page 11.  Just down a few lines.  The comment that ACD does much
better.  Do the authors know the overlap between the logPstar dataset
and ACD/XlogP/ChemAxon?  Is there a reference for this work?  I worry
that the ACD set simply has more compounds from logPstar in the
training set – and therefore gives the appearance of performing
better.

It is possible that ACD has more compounds from logPstar, but at this
point we are not privy to the training set employed by ACD for their
logP implementation

11.  Figure 1.  This could use a better figure heading.  Units would be nice. 

Second, general suggestions (take’em or leave em).

1.  It would be good to have some more specific examples – perhaps in
the beginning or section 2 – to highlight or show some descriptors.
The journal is Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry.  Med-chemists
love structures and would probably get more out of it if there were
some very simple examples at the start.

A figure has been added to provide a high level summary of descriptor
classes. In addition, the text has been updated (Section 2) to provide
some concrete examples of descriptors

2.     ***Abbreviation summary would be very helpful.

Abbreviations have been included or expanded, where relevant.

3.  I feel like section 3 could use some more work.  “What is a useful
descriptor?”  Do the authors know?  Does it depend on the problem:
potency model?  ADME?  Clustering/similarity?  Certainly the authors
know a little bit about visualization.  Feel free to give some expert
opinion.

XXX

4.  What about problems?  If I have 1000 descriptors and only 200
measured values – what can be done?  Is this considered outside the
scope of the review?  I would think that the descriptor reduction
problem and descriptors are related enough to deserve a comment.

A detailed description of descriptor selection/reduction and the
problems with data mining in general would be useful, but also
somewhat off-topic, as this article focuses on the descriptors
themselves. Certainly, we could write another 5 or 10 pages on this
topic! However, we have mentioned the problem of subset selection
(page 2)
